monthly/2023-07-monthly.md, before:

---
title: July 2023
slug: 2023-07
authors: [ch1bo]
tags: [monthly]
---

This report summarizes the work on Hydra since June 2023. It serves as
preparation for the monthly review meeting (see [slides][slides] and
[recording][recording]), where the team updates project stakeholders on recent
developments to gather their feedback on proposed plans.

## Roadmap

This month the team released version 0.11.0 which shifts the way Hydra clients
need to interact with the hydra-node when commiting funds. The project
[roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21) was also updated
to reflect latest ideas from an even higher level project plan that is updated
quarterly:

![The roadmap without idea items](./img/2023-07-roadmap-ex-ideas.png) <small><center>The roadmap without idea items</center></small>

#### Release 0.11.0

- Completes the L2 ledger isomorphism with timed transaction support

- Adds commit from external wallets API, which allows to

  - Commit multiple UTxO
  - Commit from scripts
  - Commit directly from any key

- Deprecated: Internal commits via the websocket API

- [Full release notes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.11.0) and a list of [delivered features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/milestone/11?closed=1)

#### Notable updates

TODO summarize differences

TODO write about high-level project plan (starmap)?

![The latest roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2023-07-roadmap.png) <small><center>The latest roadmap with featuresand ideas</center></small>

## Development

[Issues and pull requests closed since last
report](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2023-05-24..2023-06-22)

This month, the team worked on the following:

#### Authenticate network messages [#727](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/727)

TODO

- quickly write about re-using hydra keys and EdDSA message signing
- why? why in the application and not on the transport level?

#### ReqSn only sends Transaction IDs [#728](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/728)

TODO

- Initial idea
- scope expanded (crept?)
- specification changes / alignment

#### Github security advisories

TODO

- Found a first bug, potentially impacting off-chain security of Hydra Head
- Published advisory in security section
- Scored with CVSS, but no CVE issued
- Problems with running CI on private forks to fix security advisory

#### Moving to GHC 9.2.7

TODO

- necessary code changes (important?)
- leads to a breaking change via plutus-tx plugin
- plutus script sizes & compile time improvements (mac support?)

## Community

TODO Master-class preparation for Rare Evo
TODO Catalyst fund10 proposals and our stance to them?

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for May was held on 2023-07-26 via Google Meet with
these [slides][slides] and here is the [recording][recording].

TODO

[slides]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1CQYAFztRcqofN6sbowg37QuXQ-DQU4NcDmoMghS36B8
[recording]: https://TODO

Commit message:

Write about found security issue

monthly/2023-07-monthly.md, after:

---
title: July 2023
slug: 2023-07
authors: [ch1bo]
tags: [monthly]
---

This report summarizes the work on Hydra since June 2023. It serves as
preparation for the monthly review meeting (see [slides][slides] and
[recording][recording]), where the team updates project stakeholders on recent
developments to gather their feedback on proposed plans.

## Roadmap

This month the team released version 0.11.0 which shifts the way Hydra clients
need to interact with the hydra-node when commiting funds. The project
[roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21) was also updated
to reflect latest ideas from an even higher level project plan that is updated
quarterly:

![The roadmap without idea items](./img/2023-07-roadmap-ex-ideas.png) <small><center>The roadmap without idea items</center></small>

#### Release 0.11.0

- Completes the L2 ledger isomorphism with timed transaction support

- Adds commit from external wallets API, which allows to

  - Commit multiple UTxO
  - Commit from scripts
  - Commit directly from any key

- Deprecated: Internal commits via the websocket API

- [Full release notes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.11.0) and a list of [delivered features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/milestone/11?closed=1)

#### Notable updates

TODO summarize differences

TODO write about high-level project plan (starmap)?

![The latest roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2023-07-roadmap.png) <small><center>The latest roadmap with featuresand ideas</center></small>

## Development

[Issues and pull requests closed since last
report](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2023-05-24..2023-06-22)

This month, the team worked on the following:

#### Authenticate network messages [#727](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/727)

TODO

- quickly write about re-using hydra keys and EdDSA message signing
- why? why in the application and not on the transport level?

#### ReqSn only sends Transaction IDs [#728](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/728)

TODO

- Initial idea
- scope expanded (crept?)
- specification changes / alignment

#### Github security advisories

Team discovered a bug in the multisignature verification which could compromise
off-chain security of a Hydra Head. The fix was quite simple and they decided
to use a Github feature to report security advisory in order to test out this
feature. The process creates a separate github repo where potential security
issues could be discussed in privacy (between the reporter and the repository
administrators) since potential attackers should not be aware of any issues
until they are fixed. The team scored this issue using CVSS (The Common
Vulnerability Scoring System), the score was moderate (5.5), and they didn't
issue any CVE (Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures). The process overall feels
nice but Hydra CI is not checking the builds in these private, one-off forks so
there is a risk of merging code that doesn't compile.


#### Moving to GHC 9.2.7

TODO

- necessary code changes (important?)
- leads to a breaking change via plutus-tx plugin
- plutus script sizes & compile time improvements (mac support?)

## Community

TODO Master-class preparation for Rare Evo
TODO Catalyst fund10 proposals and our stance to them?

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for May was held on 2023-07-26 via Google Meet with
these [slides][slides] and here is the [recording][recording].

TODO

[slides]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1CQYAFztRcqofN6sbowg37QuXQ-DQU4NcDmoMghS36B8
[recording]: https://TODO
