monthly/2023-08-monthly.md, before:

---
title: August 2023
slug: 2023-08
authors: [pgrange, v0d1ch, ffakenz, ch1bo]
tags: [monthly]
---

This report summarizes the work on Hydra since July 2023. It serves as
preparation for the monthly review meeting (see [slides][slides] and
[recording][recording]), where the team updates project stakeholders on recent
developments to gather their feedback on proposed plans.

## Roadmap

This month, the team released version 0.12.0 and the project
[roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21/views/7) has been
slightly updated to focus 0.13.0 on network resiliency and bump incremental
commit and decommit in priority:

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2023-08-roadmap.jpg) <small><center>The latest roadmap with features and ideas</center></small>

#### Release 0.12.0

- Support cardano-node 8.1.2
  - Updated client and plutus versions
- Layer 2 protocol changes
  - Authenticated messages
  - Removed redundancy
- Event-sourced persistence
- New API endpoints
- Removal of _internal commit_ endpoint
- Improved off-chain tx processing performance
- Security fixes

- See [full release notes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.12.0) and a list of [delivered features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/milestone/12?closed=1)

## Development

[Issues and pull requests closed since last
report](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2023-07-28..2023-08-29)

This month, the team worked on the following:

#### Update tutorial and include Mithril [#997](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/997)

- Make tutorial work with latest version of hydra-node
- Support a wide range of platforms
- Ensure it’s kept up-to-date (using continuous integration)
- Preparation for Hydra master-class at RareEvo

#### Support cardano-node 8.1.2 [#1007](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1007)

We were still using cardano node 1.35.7 so we took some time to upgrade to the
last release 8.1.2.

#### Authenticated messages [#727](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/727)

The Hydra Head protocol had to be immune from adversaries trying to
impersonate protocol actors via the L2 network. Otherwise an attacker
could, for example, forge ReqSn messages to make the Head stuck (because they
likely will not be consistent with other messages delivered).

Note, however, that an attacker would not be able to sign snapshots nor create
valid layer 2 transactions to spend funds even without any authenticated messages
because both require the respective signing (private) keys.

The HydraV1 specification expects messages to be authenticated. We implemented that
by inserting a new authentication component in our network stack. All messages have
now to be signed with the hydra signing key of the peer sending it.

#### Event-sourced persistence [#913](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/913)

We want the hydra-node to be efficient in processing events to yield high throughput on processing transactions.

Work done as part of [#186](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/186) has demonstrated that
the primary bottleneck to faster transaction processing inside the node was the state persistence logic.
which simply overwrites the full state with whatever new state has been produced.

For that reason, we changed the persistent state to a sequence of events according to ADR 24.
Persistence is now done incrementally after each StateChanged outcome.

As a consequence, the first spike confirmed the following performance improvements: master ~300ms → spike ~6ms.

Finally, this also opens up interesting possibilities for state observation in clients.

#### New API endpoints

This release also includes some nice changes to the Hydra API. We added the
[endpoint](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/1001) to submit a
transaction to the L1 network. This feature is trying to improve developer
experience and it seemed like a nice addition for anybody developing on Hydra
since they already have hydra-node running and don't need to run cardano-node
on the client side to be able to submit transactions.

There is another new
[endpoint](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/989) that serves the
protocol parameters used in hydra-node. This provides more flexibility when
developing and also allows us to make
[projections](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/master/hydra-node/src/Hydra/API/Projection.hs#L4)
over protocol parameters data.

On top of this we also provided the hydra-node
[version](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/985) inside of the
`Greetings` message. This is very useful for debugging purposes for detecting
possible version missmatch.

#### Removal of “internal commit” endpoint [#1018](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/1018)

In the last release we announced that we will deprecate committing to the Head
using the websocket command. Now we went ahead and removed this client command
which also led to removing the _fuel_ markers we used in the past to mark the
utxo of the internal Hydra wallet which should be used in the Head.

This simplifies the setup needed to run the Head protocol and improves trust
needed to run the hydra-node since the user commits using the funds not known
to a hydra-node and doesn't need to wonder how hydra-node uses these funds -
they are available in the opened Head.

#### Security fixes [#TODO](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/TODO)

<!-- TODO @abailly ? -->

## Community

### Hydra master-class

We already mentioned our intention to have an educational session at the upcoming
Rare Evo event. The Preparation is still in progress and we fear we might have
some network connectivity challenges but here are some practical information:

- Saturday, August 26, 9:30-12:30 MDT / 15:30-18:30 UTC
- About 40 people registered for on-site event
- Planning to stream it on #hydra-live
- Planning to support people on #ask-hydra on the [IOG Discord](https://discord.gg/Qq5vNTg9PT)

### Catalyst Fund10

The team screened all the proposals mentioning Hydra and
[Mithril](https://mithril.network/doc/). We submitted eleven community reviews and
noticed, in particular, the following proposals:

- [Sundae Labs Hydra Ledger-only Mode](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/102138)
- [Sundae Labs Hydra Transaction Stream Plugin](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/102200)
- [Hydra as a B2B layer for DeFi- a white paper and a MVP](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/101626)
- [Decentralized Demeter.run - Federated Frontend Hosting - New revenue stream for SPOs](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/104411)
- [Mithril - Open-source contributor](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/105113)

[Sundae Labs Hydra Ledger-only Mode](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/102138)
proposes a Hydra node which would only receive and validate transactions, and
maintain a ledger state but not run a head per se. It should allow many useful scenarios:

- Run the ledger validation as a component in a larger layer-2 protocol
- Scenario testing frameworks
- Speculative execution

An ADR is under review on our github project:
<https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/1012>

[Sundae Labs Hydra Transaction Stream Plugin](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/102200)
will expose internal hydra event stream to external consumers. This should allow:

- Custom Persistence formats
- Chain-explorers
- Chain indexing integration with existing ecosystem tools

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for Aug was held on 2023-08-23 via Google Meet with
these [slides][slides] and here is the [recording][recording].

<!-- TODO @sebastian ? -->

[slides]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MrCeUsYb3FQk7aCwMZdQs8mc5BfLOIjkK9gcWzgDdDc/edit#slide=id.g1f87a7454a5_0_1392
[recording]: https://drive.google.com/file/d/14pDsf0hDyh9HK8sCSMmkmT8gY8YxgOQ8/view

Commit message:

Write tutorial section in prose and expand support cardano-node 8.1.2

monthly/2023-08-monthly.md, after:

---
title: August 2023
slug: 2023-08
authors: [pgrange, v0d1ch, ffakenz, ch1bo]
tags: [monthly]
---

This report summarizes the work on Hydra since July 2023. It serves as
preparation for the monthly review meeting (see [slides][slides] and
[recording][recording]), where the team updates project stakeholders on recent
developments to gather their feedback on proposed plans.

## Roadmap

This month, the team released version 0.12.0 and the project
[roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21/views/7) has been
slightly updated to focus 0.13.0 on network resiliency and bump incremental
commit and decommit in priority:

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2023-08-roadmap.jpg) <small><center>The latest roadmap with features and ideas</center></small>

#### Release 0.12.0

- Support cardano-node 8.1.2
  - Updated client and plutus versions
- Layer 2 protocol changes
  - Authenticated messages
  - Removed redundancy
- Event-sourced persistence
- New API endpoints
- Removal of _internal commit_ endpoint
- Improved off-chain tx processing performance
- Security fixes

- See [full release notes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.12.0) and a list of [delivered features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/milestone/12?closed=1)

## Development

[Issues and pull requests closed since last
report](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2023-07-28..2023-08-29)

This month, the team worked on the following:

#### Update tutorial and include Mithril [#997](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/997)

To prepare for the Hydra master-class at RareEvo, we have taken the tutorial
originally written for version 0.8.0 of Hydra and updated it to work with latest
versions.

The challenge here is to write it to be easy to follow and working for a wide
range of user platforms (operating system and processor architectures).

Besides writing the tutorial, a challenge here is to also ensure it’s kept
up-to-date, e.g. using continuous integration.

#### Support cardano-node 8.1.2 [#1007](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/1007)

In order to be able to use latest Mithril snapshots to bootstrap a
`cardano-node` for the `hydra-node`, we needed to update.

The `hydra-node` uses `cardano-api` to connect to the node using the so-called
node-to-client protocols. The format there changed slightly (although versioned)
and hence we needed to update the version of `cardano-api` used in the
`hydra-node`.

The way Haskell dependencies are managed, this required us to bump also the
`cardano-ledger` and `plutus` versions used to create our off-chain ledger and
on-chain Hydra Head protocol scripts respectively.

Hence, this has been more involved than it sounds at first, but ultimately it
led to improvements to our on-chain scripts efficiency.

TODO: how much?

#### Authenticated messages [#727](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/727)

The Hydra Head protocol had to be immune from adversaries trying to
impersonate protocol actors via the L2 network. Otherwise an attacker
could, for example, forge ReqSn messages to make the Head stuck (because they
likely will not be consistent with other messages delivered).

Note, however, that an attacker would not be able to sign snapshots nor create
valid layer 2 transactions to spend funds even without any authenticated messages
because both require the respective signing (private) keys.

The HydraV1 specification expects messages to be authenticated. We implemented that
by inserting a new authentication component in our network stack. All messages have
now to be signed with the hydra signing key of the peer sending it.

#### Event-sourced persistence [#913](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/913)

We want the hydra-node to be efficient in processing events to yield high throughput on processing transactions.

Work done as part of [#186](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/186) has demonstrated that
the primary bottleneck to faster transaction processing inside the node was the state persistence logic.
which simply overwrites the full state with whatever new state has been produced.

For that reason, we changed the persistent state to a sequence of events according to ADR 24.
Persistence is now done incrementally after each StateChanged outcome.

As a consequence, the first spike confirmed the following performance improvements: master ~300ms → spike ~6ms.

Finally, this also opens up interesting possibilities for state observation in clients.

#### New API endpoints

This release also includes some nice changes to the Hydra API. We added the
[endpoint](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/1001) to submit a
transaction to the L1 network. This feature is trying to improve developer
experience and it seemed like a nice addition for anybody developing on Hydra
since they already have hydra-node running and don't need to run cardano-node
on the client side to be able to submit transactions.

There is another new
[endpoint](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/989) that serves the
protocol parameters used in hydra-node. This provides more flexibility when
developing and also allows us to make
[projections](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/master/hydra-node/src/Hydra/API/Projection.hs#L4)
over protocol parameters data.

On top of this we also provided the hydra-node
[version](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/985) inside of the
`Greetings` message. This is very useful for debugging purposes for detecting
possible version missmatch.

#### Removal of “internal commit” endpoint [#1018](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/1018)

In the last release we announced that we will deprecate committing to the Head
using the websocket command. Now we went ahead and removed this client command
which also led to removing the _fuel_ markers we used in the past to mark the
utxo of the internal Hydra wallet which should be used in the Head.

This simplifies the setup needed to run the Head protocol and improves trust
needed to run the hydra-node since the user commits using the funds not known
to a hydra-node and doesn't need to wonder how hydra-node uses these funds -
they are available in the opened Head.

#### Security fixes [#TODO](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/TODO)

<!-- TODO @abailly ? -->

## Community

### Hydra master-class

We already mentioned our intention to have an educational session at the upcoming
Rare Evo event. The Preparation is still in progress and we fear we might have
some network connectivity challenges but here are some practical information:

- Saturday, August 26, 9:30-12:30 MDT / 15:30-18:30 UTC
- About 40 people registered for on-site event
- Planning to stream it on #hydra-live
- Planning to support people on #ask-hydra on the [IOG Discord](https://discord.gg/Qq5vNTg9PT)

### Catalyst Fund10

The team screened all the proposals mentioning Hydra and
[Mithril](https://mithril.network/doc/). We submitted eleven community reviews and
noticed, in particular, the following proposals:

- [Sundae Labs Hydra Ledger-only Mode](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/102138)
- [Sundae Labs Hydra Transaction Stream Plugin](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/102200)
- [Hydra as a B2B layer for DeFi- a white paper and a MVP](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/101626)
- [Decentralized Demeter.run - Federated Frontend Hosting - New revenue stream for SPOs](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/104411)
- [Mithril - Open-source contributor](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/105113)

[Sundae Labs Hydra Ledger-only Mode](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/102138)
proposes a Hydra node which would only receive and validate transactions, and
maintain a ledger state but not run a head per se. It should allow many useful scenarios:

- Run the ledger validation as a component in a larger layer-2 protocol
- Scenario testing frameworks
- Speculative execution

An ADR is under review on our github project:
<https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/1012>

[Sundae Labs Hydra Transaction Stream Plugin](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/102200)
will expose internal hydra event stream to external consumers. This should allow:

- Custom Persistence formats
- Chain-explorers
- Chain indexing integration with existing ecosystem tools

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for Aug was held on 2023-08-23 via Google Meet with
these [slides][slides] and here is the [recording][recording].

<!-- TODO @sebastian ? -->

[slides]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MrCeUsYb3FQk7aCwMZdQs8mc5BfLOIjkK9gcWzgDdDc/edit#slide=id.g1f87a7454a5_0_1392
[recording]: https://drive.google.com/file/d/14pDsf0hDyh9HK8sCSMmkmT8gY8YxgOQ8/view
