monthly/2024-09-monthly.md, before:

---
title: September 2024
slug: 2024-09
authors: [ch1bo, jpraynaud]
tags: [monthly]
---

This is a monthly report on the progress of 🐲 Hydra and 🛡 Mithril projects since August 2024. This document serves as a preparation for and a written summary of the monthly stakeholder review meeting, which is announced on our Discord channels and held on Google Meet. This month, the meeting was held on 2024-09-25 using these [slides][slides] and [you can see the recording here][recording].

## Mithril

[Issues and pull requests closed in September](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2024-09-01..2024-09-30)

### Roadmap

Here is an update on our current roadmap:
- **Cardano transactions signature/proving MVP** [#1457](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1457): the feature is pending activation on the `mainnet`.
- **Cardano Stake Distribution certification** [#955](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/955): the feature is pending activation on `preview`, `preprod` and `mainnet`.
- **Decentralization of signature orchestration** [#1777](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1777): we are finalizing the implementation the feature.
- **CIP for Mithril signature diffusion through Cardano network** [#1775](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1775): the draft CIP is under review.

![](img/2024-09-mithril-features-distributions.png)
<small><center>Features Activation & Distributions Schedule for Mithril</center></small>

### Distributions

We have released the new Mithril distribution [`2437.1`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/releases/tag/2437.1). This distribution includes several critical updates and enhancements:
- **BREAKING** changes in **Mithril client WASM**:
  - Implementation of seamless transition from **unstable** to **stable** features.
  - A new `unstable` option in the client allows the usage of unstable features.
  - The previous `client.unstable` implementation is not supported anymore and must be replaced with `client`.
- Stable support for **Cardano transactions** certification in signer and aggregator.
- Stable support for **Cardano stake distribution** certification in signer and aggregator.
- Bug fixes and performance improvements.

#### Future distributions

We plan to release new distributions in October:
- `2440`:
  - Stable clients for **Cardano transactions** certification
  - Activation of the certification of **Cardano stake distribution** in `pre-release-preview`, `release-preprod`, and `release-mainnet`.
  - Stable support for new `Pythagoras` Mithril era
- `2443`:
  - Stable clients for **Cardano stake distribution** certification

### Dev blog

We have published these posts:
- [Mithril client WASM breaking change](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2024/09/24/client-wasm-unstable-breaking-change)
- [Certification of Cardano transactions](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2024/07/30/cardano-transaction-certification) (Updated)

### Protocol status

![](img/2024-09-mithril-protocol-status.png)
<small><center>Latest status of the Mithril protocol on Cardano `mainnet`</center></small>

### Decentralized Message Queue for Cardano

We have kept working on the design of the **Decentralized Message Queue** for Cardano which is proposed in the draft [CIP](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/876).

This Decentralized Message Queue, aka **DMQ**, will:
- Leverage the Cardano network layer.
- Be used by Mithril at first to support the decentralized signatures diffusion from signers to aggregators.
- Be versatile enough to be used by future Cardano protocols (each of which runs a different topic in the DMQ).

Under the hood, the DMQ will be operated by a "side" node, the DMQ node, which will run a separate peer-to-peer network powered by the Ouroboros network stack:
- It will run as an external process which exposes a Unix socket to support node-to-client mini-protocols.
- It will implement node-to-client and node-to-node mini-protocols to allow for message local submission, local notification and peer-to-peer submission.
- It will retrieve the Cardano stake distribution from its local Cardano node in order to authenticate incoming messages.
- It will retrieve other peers information of the peer-to-peer network from its local Cardano node (this topic is being investigated: either with a ledger hard-fork, or by redirecting connections to the DMQ node, or by leveraging SRV record in the SPOs' DNS).
- Each topic of the message queue will run a different DMQ node instantiated with a specific configuration.

There exist producers and consumers for the DMQ topic running on some DMQ nodes. In the case of Mithril:
- The Mithril signers will be the message (Mithril individual signatures) producers.
- The Mithril aggregators will be the message (Mithril individual signatures) consumers.

Here is an overall architecture for the DMQ node:

![](img/2024-09-mithril-dmq-architecture.jpg)
<small><center>DMQ node architecture</center></small>

## Hydra

[Issues and pull requests closed in September](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2024-09-01..2024-09-30)

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2024-09-hydra-roadmap.jpeg)
<small><center>Snapshot of the new [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) with features and ideas</center></small>

Notable updates on our [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) this month include:
- [0.19.0](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.19.0) with ledger in Conway while remaining compatible with Babbage transactions [#1608](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1608)
- Completed the Hydra "Head-In-Head" Spike [#1590](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1590)
- Investigated Raft for consenus networking [#1591](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1591)
- Added "HeadId" into the "Greetings" message [#1557](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1557)
- Implemented initial suite of network-resiliance tests [#1532](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1532)
- Changed network semantics to broadcast to everyone [#1624](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1624)

### Spike: Head-in-Head

TODO: @ch1bo

### Spike: Raft-based networking

TODO: @ch1bo

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for September 2024 was held on 2024-09-25 via Google Meet,
presenting these [slides][slides] and this [recording][recording].

TODO: write

[slides]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1-_IFTibG1woAhVZohJh9gcZUO-YJyJqhH2sHv4PbJgc
[recording]: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1jygDX-AGNGIGU7pq4ljEDuG39KVkInlJ

Commit message:

Write about raft-based network experiment

monthly/2024-09-monthly.md, after:

---
title: September 2024
slug: 2024-09
authors: [ch1bo, noonio, jpraynaud]
tags: [monthly]
---

This is a monthly report on the progress of 🐲 Hydra and 🛡 Mithril projects since August 2024. This document serves as a preparation for and a written summary of the monthly stakeholder review meeting, which is announced on our Discord channels and held on Google Meet. This month, the meeting was held on 2024-09-25 using these [slides][slides] and [you can see the recording here][recording].

## Mithril

[Issues and pull requests closed in September](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2024-09-01..2024-09-30)

### Roadmap

Here is an update on our current roadmap:
- **Cardano transactions signature/proving MVP** [#1457](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1457): the feature is pending activation on the `mainnet`.
- **Cardano Stake Distribution certification** [#955](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/955): the feature is pending activation on `preview`, `preprod` and `mainnet`.
- **Decentralization of signature orchestration** [#1777](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1777): we are finalizing the implementation the feature.
- **CIP for Mithril signature diffusion through Cardano network** [#1775](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/1775): the draft CIP is under review.

![](img/2024-09-mithril-features-distributions.png)
<small><center>Features Activation & Distributions Schedule for Mithril</center></small>

### Distributions

We have released the new Mithril distribution [`2437.1`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/releases/tag/2437.1). This distribution includes several critical updates and enhancements:
- **BREAKING** changes in **Mithril client WASM**:
  - Implementation of seamless transition from **unstable** to **stable** features.
  - A new `unstable` option in the client allows the usage of unstable features.
  - The previous `client.unstable` implementation is not supported anymore and must be replaced with `client`.
- Stable support for **Cardano transactions** certification in signer and aggregator.
- Stable support for **Cardano stake distribution** certification in signer and aggregator.
- Bug fixes and performance improvements.

#### Future distributions

We plan to release new distributions in October:
- `2440`:
  - Stable clients for **Cardano transactions** certification
  - Activation of the certification of **Cardano stake distribution** in `pre-release-preview`, `release-preprod`, and `release-mainnet`.
  - Stable support for new `Pythagoras` Mithril era
- `2443`:
  - Stable clients for **Cardano stake distribution** certification

### Dev blog

We have published these posts:
- [Mithril client WASM breaking change](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2024/09/24/client-wasm-unstable-breaking-change)
- [Certification of Cardano transactions](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2024/07/30/cardano-transaction-certification) (Updated)

### Protocol status

![](img/2024-09-mithril-protocol-status.png)
<small><center>Latest status of the Mithril protocol on Cardano `mainnet`</center></small>

### Decentralized Message Queue for Cardano

We have kept working on the design of the **Decentralized Message Queue** for Cardano which is proposed in the draft [CIP](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/876).

This Decentralized Message Queue, aka **DMQ**, will:
- Leverage the Cardano network layer.
- Be used by Mithril at first to support the decentralized signatures diffusion from signers to aggregators.
- Be versatile enough to be used by future Cardano protocols (each of which runs a different topic in the DMQ).

Under the hood, the DMQ will be operated by a "side" node, the DMQ node, which will run a separate peer-to-peer network powered by the Ouroboros network stack:
- It will run as an external process which exposes a Unix socket to support node-to-client mini-protocols.
- It will implement node-to-client and node-to-node mini-protocols to allow for message local submission, local notification and peer-to-peer submission.
- It will retrieve the Cardano stake distribution from its local Cardano node in order to authenticate incoming messages.
- It will retrieve other peers information of the peer-to-peer network from its local Cardano node (this topic is being investigated: either with a ledger hard-fork, or by redirecting connections to the DMQ node, or by leveraging SRV record in the SPOs' DNS).
- Each topic of the message queue will run a different DMQ node instantiated with a specific configuration.

There exist producers and consumers for the DMQ topic running on some DMQ nodes. In the case of Mithril:
- The Mithril signers will be the message (Mithril individual signatures) producers.
- The Mithril aggregators will be the message (Mithril individual signatures) consumers.

Here is an overall architecture for the DMQ node:

![](img/2024-09-mithril-dmq-architecture.jpg)
<small><center>DMQ node architecture</center></small>

## Hydra

[Issues and pull requests closed in September](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2024-09-01..2024-09-30)

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2024-09-hydra-roadmap.jpeg)
<small><center>Snapshot of the new [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) with features and ideas</center></small>

Notable updates on our [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) this month include:
- [0.19.0](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.19.0) with ledger in Conway while remaining compatible with Babbage transactions [#1608](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1608)
- Completed the Hydra "Head-In-Head" Spike [#1590](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1590)
- Investigated Raft for consenus networking [#1591](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1591)
- Added "HeadId" into the "Greetings" message [#1557](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1557)
- Implemented initial suite of network-resiliance tests [#1532](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1532)
- Changed network semantics to broadcast to everyone [#1624](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/pull/1624)

### Spike: Head-in-Head

TODO: @ch1bo

### Spike: Raft-based networking

As reported last month, we created a new test suite about resilience of our network stack in [#1532](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1532). With this in place, we can now explore various means to reach our goal of a crash-tolerant network layer.

When we stumbled over this [fairly old research paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.01873) that explored various consensus protocols used in blockchain space, it reminds us of the correspondence between consensus and broadcasts:
> the form of consensus relevant for blockchain is technically known as atomic broadcast

Furthermore, it listed at least one of these early, permissioned blockchains that achieved crash-tolerance of `t < n/2` simply by using [etcd](https://etcd.io/) with its [Raft](https://raft.github.io/) consensus algorithm off-the-shelf. This motivated us to explore this avenue of maybe replacing our hand-rolled network stack too with this (arguably overkill) alternative in an experiment [#1591](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1591) and see how it fares.

The github issue contains all the details, but it turns out that is maybe not as exotic of an idea as we thought at first! The approach of implementing `broadcast` functionality as `put` requests to the `etcd` cluster works well when paired with an outbound, persisted buffer that handles failing writes while disconnected (or only connected to a minority). That, plus the `revision` mechanism of `etcd` and a last known revision on disk allows us to implement a `hydra-node` that is fully resilient to crashes and faulty network connections as can be seen in these [runs of our fault injection tests](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/actions/runs/11067586032).

Even performance of this early prototype is matching or exceeding our current implementation (when multi-threading performance is available). For example: using a low powered github-hosted container we see average confirmation times on the three node benchmark decrease `20ms -> 100ms`, while on desktop machine with 8+ cores the same benchmark improves `100ms -> 50ms`. As the starting numbers of the released version also vary wildly between machines, these results are only usable relatively.

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for September 2024 was held on 2024-09-25 via Google Meet,
presenting these [slides][slides] and this [recording][recording].

TODO: write

[slides]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1-_IFTibG1woAhVZohJh9gcZUO-YJyJqhH2sHv4PbJgc
[recording]: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1jygDX-AGNGIGU7pq4ljEDuG39KVkInlJ
