monthly/2025-06-monthly.md, before:

---
title: June 2025
slug: 2025-06
authors: [jpraynaud, noonio, ch1bo]
tags: [monthly]
---

This is a monthly report on the progress of 🐲 Hydra and 🛡 Mithril projects since June 2025. It serves as preparation for, and a written summary of, the monthly stakeholder review meeting. The meeting is announced on our Discord channels and held on Google Meet. This month, the meeting took place on June 25, 2025, using these [slides][slides], and you can see the [recording here][recording].

## Mithril

[Issues and pull requests closed in June](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2025-06-01..2025-06-30)

### Roadmap

Below are the latest updates on our roadmap:

- **DMQ signature diffusion prototype** [#2402](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/2402): We have started the second phase of the implementation of the DMQ signature diffusion prototype
- **Redesign the website and improve documentation** [#2051](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/2051): The new home page has been deployed on the website
- **Refactor STM library** [#2567](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/2567): We have completed the first phase of the refactoring of the SMT library, and we have started the second phase.

### Distributions

In June, we have completed the following events:

- Release of the new distribution [`2524`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/releases/tag/2524.0)
- Activation of the support for UTxO-HD in the Mithril client CLI
- Preparation of the switch to the new Cardano database certification backend.

In July, the following events are planned:

- Release of a new distribution (`2529`).

### Dev blog

We have published the following post:

- [Switching to Cardano database incremental certification](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2025/06/17/client-cli-cardano-database-backends)
- [UTXO-HD ledger state snapshot converter command in client CLI](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2025/06/16/client-cli-utxo-snapshot-converter-command)
- [Distribution `2524` is now available](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2025/06/16/distribution-2524).

### New website homepage

The new homepage of the Mithril website has been deployed. It features a more modern design, improved navigation, and better accessibility.
The new homepage is now live at [mithril.network](https://mithril.network).

![The new homepage](./img/2025-06-mithril-website.png)
<small><center>Snapshot of the new homepage</center></small>

### DMQ implementation update

Here is the current status of the DMQ implementation:

| **Mini-protocols** | **Pallas** | **Mithril Signer** | **Mithril Aggregator** | **Haskell DMQ Node** |
| ------------------ | :--------: | :----------------: | :--------------------: | :------------------: |
| N2C Submission     |     ✓      |         ✓          |           -            |    _In progress_     |
| N2C Notification   |     ✓      |         -          |           ✓            |    _In progress_     |
| N2N Diffusion      |     -      |         -          |           -            |    _In progress_     |

The next steps are to complete a end to end test with a Fake DMQ node, and progressively replace it with the real Haskell DMQ node implementation. Our goal is to have the DMQ network start operating in a test network.

### Cardano database certification backend update

TODO: Update

### UTxO-HD ledger state snapshot converter command in client CLI

TODO: Update

### Verify existing Cardano database with client CLI

TODO: Update

### Protocol status

The protocol operated smoothly on the `release-mainnet` network with the following metrics:

- **Registered stake**: `4.7B₳` (`21%` of the Cardano network)
- **Registered SPOs**: `247` (`9%` of the Cardano network)
- **Full Cardano database restorations**: `185` restorations
- **Signer software adoption**: `81.1%` of the SPOs are running a recent version (one of the last three releases).

You can find more information on the [Mithril protocol insights dashboard](https://lookerstudio.google.com/s/mbL23-8gibI).

## Hydra

TODO: Update

[Issues and pull requests closed in June](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2025-06-01..2025-06-30)

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2025-06-hydra-roadmap.png)
<small><center>Snapshot of the new [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/6) with features and ideas</center></small>

This month, notable [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/6) updates include:

### [0.22.0 Release](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.22.0)

TODO: Update

### New working group

TODO: Update

### Roadmap update

TODO: Update

We continue to focus on UX improvements and better logging/errors, while also
starting to tackle more of the user-reported bugs and feature requests.

## Links

TODO: Update recording link

The monthly review meeting for June 2025 took place on June 25, 2025, via Google Meet.
The presentation [slides][slides] and the [recording][recording] are available for review.

[slides]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1rkEr9zPWY7MH7sRACYZ2ENDLQtccUYeBPJaC-za7-Ew/edit?slide=id.g1f87a7454a5_0_1392#slide=id.g1f87a7454a5_0_1392
[recording]: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1qdOu_3WXXxEbQg-IhVdgZFENgJKX2o6A/view?usp=sharing

Commit message:

Add Mithril Cardano DB backends section

monthly/2025-06-monthly.md, after:

---
title: June 2025
slug: 2025-06
authors: [jpraynaud, noonio, ch1bo]
tags: [monthly]
---

This is a monthly report on the progress of 🐲 Hydra and 🛡 Mithril projects since June 2025. It serves as preparation for, and a written summary of, the monthly stakeholder review meeting. The meeting is announced on our Discord channels and held on Google Meet. This month, the meeting took place on June 25, 2025, using these [slides][slides], and you can see the [recording here][recording].

## Mithril

[Issues and pull requests closed in June](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2025-06-01..2025-06-30)

### Roadmap

Below are the latest updates on our roadmap:

- **DMQ signature diffusion prototype** [#2402](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/2402): We have started the second phase of the implementation of the DMQ signature diffusion prototype
- **Redesign the website and improve documentation** [#2051](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/2051): The new home page has been deployed on the website
- **Refactor STM library** [#2567](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues/2567): We have completed the first phase of the refactoring of the SMT library, and we have started the second phase.

### Distributions

In June, we have completed the following events:

- Release of the new distribution [`2524`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/releases/tag/2524.0)
- Activation of the support for UTxO-HD in the Mithril client CLI
- Preparation of the switch to the new Cardano database certification backend.

In July, the following events are planned:

- Release of a new distribution (`2529`).

### Dev blog

We have published the following post:

- [Switching to Cardano database incremental certification](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2025/06/17/client-cli-cardano-database-backends)
- [UTXO-HD ledger state snapshot converter command in client CLI](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2025/06/16/client-cli-utxo-snapshot-converter-command)
- [Distribution `2524` is now available](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2025/06/16/distribution-2524).

### New website homepage

The new homepage of the Mithril website has been deployed. It features a more modern design, improved navigation, and better accessibility.
The new homepage is now live at [mithril.network](https://mithril.network).

![The new homepage](./img/2025-06-mithril-website.png)
<small><center>Snapshot of the new homepage</center></small>

### DMQ implementation update

Here is the current status of the DMQ implementation:

| **Mini-protocols** | **Pallas** | **Mithril Signer** | **Mithril Aggregator** | **Haskell DMQ Node** |
| ------------------ | :--------: | :----------------: | :--------------------: | :------------------: |
| N2C Submission     |     ✓      |         ✓          |           -            |    _In progress_     |
| N2C Notification   |     ✓      |         -          |           ✓            |    _In progress_     |
| N2N Diffusion      |     -      |         -          |           -            |    _In progress_     |

The next steps are to complete a end to end test with a Fake DMQ node, and progressively replace it with the real Haskell DMQ node implementation. Our goal is to have the DMQ network start operating in a test network.

### Cardano database certification backend update

The Cardano node database v2 certification offers incremental verification and greater efficiency compared to the original method. It will progressively replace the current certification process for the Cardano node internal database.

In particular, the `cardano-db` command in the Mithril client CLI has been updated to support the new incremental certification process and eventually a seamless switch to the new backend. A new `--backend` option has been added to the command, allowing users to specify the certification version:

- `--backend v1` uses the original Cardano node database certification (this remains the default)
- `--backend v2` enables the new incremental Cardano node database certification.

We will progressively switch to the new backend in the coming months, a full schedule is available in this blog post: [Switching to Cardano database incremental certification](https://mithril.network/doc/dev-blog/2025/06/17/client-cli-cardano-database-backends).

### UTxO-HD ledger state snapshot converter command in client CLI

TODO: Update

### Verify existing Cardano database with client CLI

TODO: Update

### Protocol status

The protocol operated smoothly on the `release-mainnet` network with the following metrics:

- **Registered stake**: `4.7B₳` (`21%` of the Cardano network)
- **Registered SPOs**: `247` (`9%` of the Cardano network)
- **Full Cardano database restorations**: `185` restorations
- **Signer software adoption**: `81.1%` of the SPOs are running a recent version (one of the last three releases).

You can find more information on the [Mithril protocol insights dashboard](https://lookerstudio.google.com/s/mbL23-8gibI).

## Hydra

TODO: Update

[Issues and pull requests closed in June](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2025-06-01..2025-06-30)

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2025-06-hydra-roadmap.png)
<small><center>Snapshot of the new [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/6) with features and ideas</center></small>

This month, notable [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/6) updates include:

### [0.22.0 Release](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/releases/tag/0.22.0)

TODO: Update

### New working group

TODO: Update

### Roadmap update

TODO: Update

We continue to focus on UX improvements and better logging/errors, while also
starting to tackle more of the user-reported bugs and feature requests.

## Links

TODO: Update recording link

The monthly review meeting for June 2025 took place on June 25, 2025, via Google Meet.
The presentation [slides][slides] and the [recording][recording] are available for review.

[slides]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1rkEr9zPWY7MH7sRACYZ2ENDLQtccUYeBPJaC-za7-Ew/edit?slide=id.g1f87a7454a5_0_1392#slide=id.g1f87a7454a5_0_1392
[recording]: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1qdOu_3WXXxEbQg-IhVdgZFENgJKX2o6A/view?usp=sharing
