src/pages/index.md, before:

# Cardano Scaling working group

Consortium of projects and teams working on the common vision of increasing
growth and adoption of Cardano by solving scalability problems.

## Vision

We stand for growth and adoption of Cardano. To empower individuals, bank the
unbanked and be a viable decentralized alternative, scalability is not optional.
In fact, we believe there is only a decentralized future if it is scalable
enough.

## Mission

By making operation more flexible, faster, simpler, we remove entry barriers for
developers and end users, to ultimately become an enabling factor for new and
scalable applications on Cardano.

We build and maintain technological foundations (Mithril, Hydra, …) to enable
custom solutions providing scalability and security. Besides creating open
platforms, we will engage in development of key products like payments, voting
and DeFI on Cardano.

## Projects

<table>
  <tr>
     <td>
         <img width="100" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/master/docs/static/img/hydra.png" />
     </td>
     <td>
         <a href="https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra">Hydra</a> is the
         layer-two scalability solution for Cardano, which aims to increase the speed
         of transactions (low latency, high throughput) and minimize transaction
         cost. The Hydra Head protocol allows applications to process transactions
         off-chain in a highly configurable ledger, but still using the same
         transaction format and tools as with Cardano.
     </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
     <td>
         <img width="100" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cardano-scaling/mithril/main/docs/website/static/img/logo.png" />
     </td>
     <td>
         <a href="https://github.com/cardano-scaling/mithril">Mithril</a> is
         a cryptographic protocol and layer-two network in which stake pool
         operators attest to certain facts using their stake. Mithril signed
         snapshots of the Cardano blockchain enable fast-bootstrapping of nodes
         and applications running on Cardano in a trustless way.
     </td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Community

Need some help getting started? We are on [IOG Technical Community's Discord](https://discord.gg/Qq5vNTg9PT) on the #ask-hydra and #moria channels.

Some members of this organization are also on Twitter, so follow them for updates on the future of Cardano Scaling!

- [`@ch1bo_`](https://twitter.com/ch1bo_)
- [`@dr_c0d3`](https://twitter.com/dr_c0d3)

## Disclaimer

- The logo is still a draft and was created by Alexander Wende.
- This organization is in a **drafting stage** and we are currently evaluating whether moving repositories, project organization and communication into this organization makes sense.

Commit message:

Tone down nature of organization
There might be multiple working groups having their projects hosted here.

src/pages/index.md, after:

# Cardano Scaling

Collection of projects revolving around the common vision of increasing growth
and adoption of Cardano by solving scalability problems.

## Vision

We stand for growth and adoption of Cardano. To empower individuals, bank the
unbanked and be a viable decentralized alternative, scalability is not optional.
In fact, we believe there is only a decentralized future if it is scalable
enough.

## Mission

By making operation more flexible, faster, simpler, we remove entry barriers for
developers and end users, to ultimately become an enabling factor for new and
scalable applications on Cardano.

We build and maintain technological foundations (Mithril, Hydra, …) to enable
custom solutions providing scalability and security. Besides creating open
platforms, we will engage in development of key products like payments, voting
and DeFI on Cardano.

## Projects

<table>
  <tr>
     <td>
         <img width="100" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/master/docs/static/img/hydra.png" />
     </td>
     <td>
         <a href="https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra">Hydra</a> is the
         layer-two scalability solution for Cardano, which aims to increase the speed
         of transactions (low latency, high throughput) and minimize transaction
         cost. The Hydra Head protocol allows applications to process transactions
         off-chain in a highly configurable ledger, but still using the same
         transaction format and tools as with Cardano.
     </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
     <td>
         <img width="100" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cardano-scaling/mithril/main/docs/website/static/img/logo.png" />
     </td>
     <td>
         <a href="https://github.com/cardano-scaling/mithril">Mithril</a> is
         a cryptographic protocol and layer-two network in which stake pool
         operators attest to certain facts using their stake. Mithril signed
         snapshots of the Cardano blockchain enable fast-bootstrapping of nodes
         and applications running on Cardano in a trustless way.
     </td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Community

Want to get involved? We are on [IOG Technical Community's Discord](https://discord.gg/Qq5vNTg9PT) on the #ask-hydra and #moria channels.

Some members of this organization are also on Twitter, so follow them for updates on the future of Cardano Scaling!

- [`@ch1bo_`](https://twitter.com/ch1bo_)
- [`@dr_c0d3`](https://twitter.com/dr_c0d3)

## Disclaimer

- The logo is still a draft and was created by Alexander Wende.
- This organization is in a **drafting stage** and we are currently evaluating whether moving repositories, project organization and communication into this organization makes sense.
