docs/getting-started/index.md, before:

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Getting Started

:::warning Mainnet Availability

Hydra is the layer-two scalability solution for Cardano, which aims to increase
the speed of transactions (low latency, high throughput) and minimize
transaction cost.

This repository contains the proof-of-concept implementation for the Hydra [Head
protocol](https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/299.pdf). It is a developer preview that
we've put together, marching towards a production ready solution. It contains a
`hydra-node`, which runs a simplified (coordinated) Hydra Head protocol,
connects to other hydra-nodes, interfaces the Cardano blockchain and provides an
API to clients such as the included example terminal user interface `hydra-tui`.

:rotating_light: Mainnet Availability :rotating_light:

The Hydra Head protocol version 0.10.0 is compatible with the Cardano mainnet,
which means it is possible to run a hydra-node on mainnet for testing purposes.

Before running a Hydra node to take part in the Hydra Head protocol, developers
are strongly encouraged to review the [relevant section](/docs/known-issues) of
the documentation in order to understand the current limitations and the
possible consequences.

By using Hydra Head protocol version 0.10.0, you understand the protocol is in
development and that use of the hydra-node on mainnet is entirely at your own
risk.

You also acknowledge and agree to have an adequate understanding of the risks
associated with use of the Hydra Head protocol version 0.10.0 and that all
information and materials published, distributed or otherwise made available on
Hydra.Family and Hydra Github Repository is available on an ‘AS IS’ and ‘AS
AVAILABLE’ basis, without any representations or warranties of any kind. All
implied terms are excluded to the fullest extent permitted by law. For details,
see also sections 7, 8 and 9 of Apache 2.0 License.

:::

```mdx-code-block
import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';
import {useCurrentSidebarCategory} from '@docusaurus/theme-common';

<DocCardList items={useCurrentSidebarCategory().items}/>
```

Commit message:

Fix link to known issues page and add license link
Using reference style links we can easily copy the same body of text for
the disclaimer between README and Getting-Started index page.

docs/getting-started/index.md, after:

---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Getting Started

Hydra is the layer-two scalability solution for Cardano, which aims to increase
the speed of transactions (low latency, high throughput) and minimize
transaction cost.

This repository contains the proof-of-concept implementation for the Hydra [Head
protocol](https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/299.pdf). It is a developer preview that
we've put together, marching towards a production ready solution. It contains a
`hydra-node`, which runs a simplified (coordinated) Hydra Head protocol,
connects to other hydra-nodes, interfaces the Cardano blockchain and provides an
API to clients such as the included example terminal user interface `hydra-tui`.

:::warning Mainnet Availability

The Hydra Head protocol version 0.10.0 is compatible with the Cardano mainnet,
which means it is possible to run a hydra-node on mainnet for testing purposes.

Before running a `hydra-node` to take part in the Hydra Head protocol,
developers are strongly encouraged to review the [known issues][known-issues] in
the documentation in order to understand the current limitations and the
possible consequences.

By using Hydra Head protocol version 0.10.0, you understand the protocol is in
development and that use of the hydra-node on mainnet is entirely at your own
risk.

You also acknowledge and agree to have an adequate understanding of the risks
associated with use of the Hydra Head protocol version 0.10.0 and that all
information and materials published, distributed or otherwise made available on
Hydra.Family and Hydra Github Repository is available on an ‘AS IS’ and ‘AS
AVAILABLE’ basis, without any representations or warranties of any kind. All
implied terms are excluded to the fullest extent permitted by law. For details,
see also sections 7, 8 and 9 of the [Apache 2.0 License][license].

:::

[known-issues]: ../known-issues
[license]: https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/master/LICENSE

```mdx-code-block
import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';
import {useCurrentSidebarCategory} from '@docusaurus/theme-common';

<DocCardList items={useCurrentSidebarCategory().items}/>
```
